---
layout: page
title: Turbulence in Plasmas
description: Inverse cascade in gyrofluids
img: assets/img/jz_bal_B11_t11000_z0.png
importance: 2
category: work
---

In this project the idea is to model ion and sub-ion scales that one finds in solar wind turbulence of forward and backward propagating Alfvèn waves (AW). 

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/solarwind.jpg title: "example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/SPP-shown-along-its-orbit.jpg title: "example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-3 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/Wicksimbalance.png title: "example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    On the left, we have artists image of solar wind emenating from the sun. Middle, shows schematics of [Solar Parker Probe](https://www.nasa.gov/content/goddard/parker-solar-probe) mission. Right, forward and backward propagating AW spectra measured by another spacecraft
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/R14BVortex.png title: "example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    This is an image of a magnetic vortex in the simulation that is driven at a much smaller scale. So in fact, this structure is generated by a process of inverse transfer of forward energy. I hestitate to say "inverse cascade" because the transfer is non-local.
</div>

You can also put regular text between your rows of images.
Say you wanted to write a little bit about your project before you posted the rest of the images.
You describe how you toiled, sweated, *bled* for your project, and then... you reveal it's glory in the next row of images.


<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/6.jpg title: "example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/11.jpg title: "example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    You can also have artistically styled 2/3 + 1/3 images, like these.
</div>


The code is simple.
Just wrap your images with `<div class="col-sm">` and place them inside `<div class="row">` (read more about the <a href="https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/layout/grid/">Bootstrap Grid</a> system).
To make images responsive, add `img-fluid` class to each; for rounded corners and shadows use `rounded` and `z-depth-1` classes.
Here's the code for the last row of images above:

{% raw %}
```html
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/6.jpg title: "example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/11.jpg title: "example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
```
{% endraw %}
