---
layout: post
title:  Standard Nontwist Map
date: 2015-05-15 21:01:00
description: how to turn great science into art
tags: formatting images
categories: sample-posts
---

In this post I discuss how I made the figures that won the third place for [visualization of science contest](https://cns.utexas.edu/news/visualizing-science-2016) at the University of Texas at Austin where I did my PhD. The image is based on research produced many years ago on Nontwist maps by del-Castillo-Negrete and Morrison. These maps were developed to describe discretized low-dimensional dynamics that preserves areas under transformation and violates the so-called `twist condition` (see equation \eqref{eq:twist}). For more details on mathematical and physical properties see a review on [Scholarpedia.](http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Nontwist_maps). The model is rather abstract but it aims to provide understanding for chaotic transport and quasi-integrable systems. The equations descrbing the Standard Nontwist Map (SNM) are as follows

\begin{equation}\label{eq:SNM}
\begin{aligned}
&\overline{\mathrm{x}}=\mathrm{x}+\mathrm{a}\left(1-\overline{\mathrm{y}}^2\right), \quad(\text { modulo } 1) \\
&\overline{\mathrm{y}}=\mathrm{y}-\mathrm{b} \sin (2 \pi \mathrm{x})
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}

with the non-twist condition

\begin{equation}\label{eq:twist}
\frac{\partial \overline{\mathrm{x}}(\mathrm{x}, \mathrm{y})}{\partial \mathrm{y}} \geq \mathrm{c}>0 \quad \forall(\mathrm{x}, \mathrm{y})
\end{equation}

The map (equation \eqref{eq:SNM}) is iterated succesively, so one can think of points on it as [Poincare Sections of map](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poincar%C3%A9_map) that could correspond to, say, points where magnetic field line pierces a page. The colormap is chosen for easthetical reasons, however, it does correspond to initial conditions (each color is locus of points that correspond to a given iteration). The continuous (orderly) points correspond to periodic orbits, whereas around we see lots chaotic orbits. When the control parameters $$a$$ and $$b$$ are varied the shape of the image changes significantly from completely integrable (straight lines) image to completely chaotic. Below we give maps for parameters that we found most aesthetically pleasing


<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/Standardnontwistmaplowres.png title: "example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable: true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% responsive_image path: assets/img/snm615_4_tlowres.png title: "example image" class: "img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable: true %}
    </div>
</div>

These diagrams can be created in wolfram mathematica using the following code (node that both number of points and number of iterations have to be increased from 500 to 3000):
```mathematica
Graphics[
    a = 0.615; b = 0.4; 
    data = Table[RecurrenceTable[{q[n + 1] == 
         Mod[q[n] + a (1 - (p[n] - b Sin[2 \[Pi] q[n]])^2), 1], 
        p[n + 1] == p[n] - b Sin[2 \[Pi] q[n]], 
        p[1] == RandomReal[{-0.5, 0.5}], q[1] == RandomReal[{0, 1}]}, {q, 
        p}, {n, 1, 500}], {i, 1, 500}]; AbsoluteTiming[
     ListPlot[data, PlotRange -> {{0, 1}, {-0.5, 0.5}}, 
      ImageSize -> Full,
      Axes -> False, PlotMarkers -> {"\[FilledCircle]", 0.5}, 
      PlotStyle -> 
       ColorData["SunsetColors"] /@ (Range[0, Length@data]/Length@data), 
      Background -> Darker[Blue, 0.5], ImageSize -> Full, 
      PerformanceGoal -> "Speed"]
  ]
  ```

